[AIRFLOW-5088][AIP-24] Persisting serialized DAG in DB for webserver scalability (#5743)
mistercrunch/Airflow: docs/howto/enable-dag-serialization.rst

 .. Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
    or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
    distributed with this work for additional information
    regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
    to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
    "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
    with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

 ..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

 .. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
    software distributed under the License is distributed on an
    "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
    KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
    specific language governing permissions and limitations
    under the License.

> Enable DAG Serialization

Reviewer: I think that you should first describe the feature and then describe how to enable it.

Reviewer 2: Updated.

========================

Add the following settings in ``airflow.cfg``:

.. code-block:: ini

    [core]
    store_serialized_dags = True
    min_serialized_dag_update_interval = 30

*   ``store_serialized_dags``: This flag decides whether to serialises DAGs and persist them in DB.
    If set to True, Webserver reads from DB instead of parsing DAG files
*   ``min_serialized_dag_update_interval``: This flag sets the minimum interval (in seconds) after which
    the serialized DAG in DB should be updated. This helps in reducing database write rate.

If you are updating Airflow from <1.10.6, please do not forget to run ``airflow db upgrade``.

How it works
------------

In order to make Airflow Webserver stateless (almost!), Airflow >=1.10.6 supports
DAG Serialization and DB Persistence.

.. image:: ../img/dag_serialization.png

> As shown in the image above in Vanilla Airflow, the Webserver and the Scheduler both

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Vanilla Airflow, the Webserver and the Scheduler both
```

The term "Vanilia Airflow" seems strange to me. Are you sure you need to enter this terms in the documentation? I would prefer "Airflow with DAG persistence in DB" and "Airflow without DAG persistence in DB".

Reviewer 2: Agree. Updated

needs access to the DAG files. Both the scheduler and webserver parses the DAG files.

With **DAG Serialization** we aim to decouple the webserver from DAG parsing
which would make the Webserver very light-weight.

> As shown in the image above, when using the dag_serilization feature,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As shown in the image above, when using the this feature,
```

Reviewer 2: Updated

serialized DAGs in JSON, de-serializes them and create the DagBag and uses it
to show in the UI.

One of the key features that is implemented as the part of DAG Serialization is that
instead of loading an entire DagBag when the WebServer starts we only load each DAG on demand from the
Serialized Dag table. This helps reduce Webserver startup time and memory. The reduction is notable
when you have large number of DAGs.

Below is the screenshot of the ``serialized_dag`` table in Metadata DB:

.. image:: ../img/serialized_dag_table.png

Limitations
-----------
The Webserver will still need access to DAG files in the following cases,
which is why we said "almost" stateless.

*   **Rendered Template** tab will still have to parse Python file as it needs all the details like
    the execution date and even the data passed by the upstream task using Xcom.
*   **Code View** will read the DAG File & show it using Pygments.
    However, it does not need to Parse the Python file so it is still a small operation.
*   :doc:`Extra Operator Links <define_extra_link>` would not work out of
    the box. They need to be defined in Airflow Plugin.

>     **Existing Airflow Operators**:

Reviewer: I don't understand the relationship of this text to DAG serialization

Reviewer 3: I think @kaxil is referring to existing operators with `operator extra links`

Reviewer 2: Yes, I was. Although now that we already have docs for adding operator using plugin merged, I will remove it from here

    To make extra operator links work with existing operators like BigQuery, copy all

>     the classes that are defined in ``operator_extra_links`` property.

Reviewer 3: Does it mean `operator_extra_links` can only be registered through plugin in the future?

Reviewer 4: If dag serialization becomes the default yes. Well, either bundled in Airflow, or registered via a plugin.

@kaxil We should check that we serialize the "bundled" GCP links correctly (they should work as the webserver will have the code for this)

Reviewer 3: Can you clarify a bit about the "bundled" GCP links? Are you talking about the operator extra links registered as a `@property` in the operator like:
https://github.com/apache/airflow/blob/master/airflow/gcp/operators/bigquery.py#L460-L470
?

Reviewer 2: Yes, unfortunately in the current implementation you need to add operator links via plugin for in-built operators too.

Let me try and see if I can remove the need to register links for in-built operators links

Reviewer 2: Looks like the currently defined OperatorLinks for inbuilt operators are dependent on the Instance of operator class.

Example the following is Qubole Operator:

```
class QDSLink(BaseOperatorLink):
    """Link to QDS"""
    name = 'Go to QDS'

    def get_link(self, operator, dttm):
        return operator.get_hook().get_extra_links(operator, dttm)
```
which depends on `conn = BaseHook.get_connection(operator.kwargs['qubole_conn_id'])` line. We don't store `qubole_conn_id` as the task property in our serialized DAG.

and the BigqueryOperator is:

```
@property
    def operator_extra_links(self):
        """
        Return operator extra lxinks
        """
        if isinstance(self.sql, str):
            return (
                BigQueryConsoleLink(),
            )
        return (
            BigQueryConsoleIndexableLink(i) for i, _ in enumerate(self.sql)
        )
```
this one is dependent on `self.sql` property !! which the Serialized Operator won't have access to as we don't store that info in serialized DAG.

cc @ashb  @milton0825

Reviewer 4: Hmmmm. Tricky. And even if we did store the attributes (which is doable by setting `_serialized_fields` on the operator sub-classes) these links might not work for Quoble: `operator` will be SerializedBaseOperator, not a `QuobleOperator`.

(BQ would work well enough as the SQL would be of the right length, even if it was templated so the value stored in s10n is not the final value)

Reviewer 2: Exactly. Hence I feel to let the user create their own OperatorLink via plugin !

And storing properties like `self.sql` will increase the serialized blob size as it is a templated field it can take in a huge SQL Query.

Reviewer 3: Should we create a pre-existing plugin and register the existing links there so that users can re-use them easily?

Reviewer 4: I think for the pre-existing ones that do work we should do what is neccsary to registry them which since it is "internal" doesn't need to be a full plugin. Something like

```
import airflow.plugins_manager
airflow.plugins_manager.operator_extra_links.append(BigQueryConsoleLink)
```

sort of thing.

    For :class:`~airflow.gcp.operators.bigquery.BigQueryOperator` you can create the following plugin for extra links:

    .. code-block:: python

>         from airflow.plugins_manager import AirflowPlugin

Reviewer: I'm not a fan of posting python code in rst files. We use literalinclude for GCP guides. This allows us to automatically test code snippets from the documentation

        from airflow.models.baseoperator import BaseOperatorLink
        from airflow.gcp.operators.bigquery import BigQueryOperator

        class BigQueryConsoleLink(BaseOperatorLink):
            """
            Helper class for constructing BigQuery link.
            """
            name = 'BigQuery Console'
            operators = [BigQueryOperator]

            def get_link(self, operator, dttm):
                ti = TaskInstance(task=operator, execution_date=dttm)
                job_id = ti.xcom_pull(task_ids=operator.task_id, key='job_id')

>                 return BIGQUERY_JOB_DETAILS_LINK_FMT.format(job_id=job_id) if job_id else ''

Reviewer: This code is not 100% valid. It has been updated. https://github.com/apache/airflow/pull/5906/files

Reviewer 2: Yes removed this code from this file.

Also, this OperatorLinks won't work with Serialized DAGs as described in  https://github.com/apache/airflow/pull/5743#discussion_r337801737
